Welcome, uh, Mike.
Um, you've got, um, four mps scattered around the country,
uh, for this one, and
we're looking forward to hearing from you.
I'll let you know when there's one or two minutes to go,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
Until then, it's all yours.
I'll try and leave lots of time for questions.
Tim, uh, Kiara, everyone? Yes. Mike Potter.
I'm CEO at Disability Connect.
I've got lived experience of disability.
I have a spinal cord injury.
I also have one daughter who is dyslexic,
and another one who is Neurodiverse
and a family member who has significant health needs.
So, uh, I, I guess I truly embody
what Disability Connect is about.
A parent led disability organization,
uh, centered around information.
Uh, 17 to 20% of New Zealanders are disabled and,
but disabled people are not inherently vulnerable.
It's the systems that create vulnerability, not people.
Emergency management must ensure disabled people
and their families are safe because
of the system, not in spite of it.
Yes, we're a disability. We're disability connect.
Apparently an organization working alongside disabled
people, and they're far now,
increasingly across the country.
And we see daily how gaps in emergency emergency planning,
uh, create issues in, uh, communication and support.
Families are the primary responders
for most disabled people, yet they're really treated
as partners and preparedness.
When families are overlooked,
disabled people are placed at risk.
Disabled people rely on essential supports
that are easily disrupted in emergencies,
power dependent equipment, communication devices,
medication, mobility, aids, sensory supports,
and stable routines.
These are life supporting infrastructure,
and when they fail, people face immediate danger.
According to massive university, 30% of disabled children
live in single parent
or low income households, which reduces their ability
to prepare to evacuate or recover without targeted support.
Clear example of what happens when disabled people excluded
from planning comes from Christchurch
after the second earthquake,
my former boss from Christian Blind Mission
and a colleague traveled south
to help locate blind people for welfare checks.
They were handed, handed bottles of water
and an old inaccurate list of
where blind people might have been living.
That was the entire system.
Disabled people were invisible because they'd never been
included in planning, and we cannot repeat that.
This exclusion continues today.
Emergency plans are written about disabled people not
with them, and certainly not with their families.
This leads to predictable failures, such
as an inaccessible evacuation, routes, collapse
of disability supports responders without accurate
information on where disabled people
and their families live,
and emergency housing that cannot be used.
Another example I'll give you is emergency centers,
which have an oh 800 number.
If I'm at home and we have a disaster,
my daughter is not gonna ring an oh 800
number, she wants to text.
There were no cell phones at any of the,
the disability centers around Auckland.
And despite our requests, none were established.
Um, displacement often places disabled people far from
carers, schools and services, creating new risks
and higher long-term costs.
Planning with disabled people and their families
is not only the right thing to do, it's more efficient
and reduces downstream costs for government.
Climate driven emergencies are increasing
in frequency and severity.
I'm sure you've heard enough of that.
Uh, and without systemic change, disabled people
and their families will continue
to be dis disproportionately affected.
Emergency systems must protect decision making rights,
ensure people are not separated from caregivers are
unnecessarily and provide communication that is redundant,
accessible, and non-digital.
Evacuation must include accessible transport
and the ability to move equipment and service animals.
Community-based resilience also matters
as disabled people rely heavily on neighbors, churches,
marai, and formal networks.
I should point out in this that recently I attended a
special school in Auckland
and was told there were three families that turned up
at the start of the school year with no cell phone
and no email.
So what's gonna happen to them in a disaster?
The bill must require inclusion, uh,
and this includes families Without monitoring
accountability, disabled people
will continue to be left behind.
Annual reporting, independent audits
and a statutory statutory role for faha are essential
to ensure meaningful implementation.
But I wanna leave you with three essential actions.
First guarantee the continuity of continuity
of disability supports equipment repair
and supply chains in all emergency plans.
Uh, within the disasters
that I've seen recently in New Zealand,
it's actually disability, uh, support organizations
that have stepped in, not the DPOs, not fi kaha,
but they're the ones who are actually supplying equipment on
the ground, and many
of them are developing good systems to help with that.
I can give you some examples.
Um, secondly, require accessible evacuation
and emergency housing as standard.
Where are we going to live if there's a disaster
and how are we gonna get out of Auckland
would be another one to get there.
Given there's limited housing in Northland
and not so much further down the line, there needs
to be a really good plan around evacuation,
emergency housing, third embed dis dis disability,
and particularly the disabled people and their families
and national, regional and local governance.
So plenty is done with disabled people
and families, not for them.
Though far kaha
and the disabled people's
organizations are good at what they do.
They often admit the voice of families,
and I'd really like to see that family enshrined
with a family here, given the, the effect that
emergencies have on on them.
Success is a system with disabled people
and families are visible, planned for,
and able to act with agency in any emergency.
Disabled people in their whanau are not just at risk groups,
they're partners in resilience,
which has been included from the start.
This bill is an opportunity
to build a system that protects everyone.
Inclusion must be guaranteed in law and in practice.
And I welcome your questions.
Thank you. And, and real, like a really interesting point
around the, um, you know, lack of cell phones
and people that want to text these days and not ring.
So I found that really interesting.
Um, I'll just hand over to Andy Foster for a question.
Yeah. Look, thank you very much for, uh, first
of all the work that you do and secondly for the submission.
Um, two questions I've got there.
One is, um, in terms of making, uh, making sure that, um,
people with disability have got, are visible, um,
what's the, the role of the people, those families, those,
um, in making sure that they are visible?
'cause of the other bit there is, if you're constantly
or often moving very, very hard for authorities
to know who's, who's who, who's where.
Uh, and the second question I've got is you made a comment
about where's there gonna be accommodation
and how to get out of Auckland.
I just wonder what your thinking is in terms of, uh,
people being in place in the event of an, uh,
obviously there are various different sorts of emergencies,
people staying in place largely within the
community that they are in.
Um, unless it is utterly, utterly untenable, uh,
and I can imagine if something's untenable in Auckland,
that would be a hell of a disaster in that situation.
Yeah, very much so. Um, I'll,
I'll tackle the second question first.
I kind of, um, in terms of what's gonna happen in terms
of staying in place, parents are amazingly resilient.
I'm there carrying a huge amount of anxiety,
and we are hearing that we are getting
semi-regular phone calls, uh, incredibly stressed
and actually talking about suicide.
This is parents of disabled people.
We are not an organization that deals in that space.
So that's another con conflicting factor.
In most cases, families do not have a lot of choice about
where they live because they're living in social housing
or they're living in rental accommodation.
Mm-hmm. There's very few
that actually own their own property.
So those that own their own property,
I don't think there's a problem with
that when you're looking at social housing,
I think there's a, in terms of what's Kaya are doing
to making sure that their places are resilient
and able to cope in terms of a disaster.
Um, but the other side is the rental market,
and that's something that I just couldn't tell you, um,
about whether the families are resilient or not.
So much comes down to the nature of the disability
and the capability of the families.
We've got an aging population,
an increasing number in their sixties
and seventies with disabled children in their forties.
The health system is actually, it's actually good
because the children will outlive their parents
and that's gonna create some issues somewhere.
So I really think there needs, there was,
there's just not the data to be able to tell you
and give you a, give you a,
a straight up answer to that question. Um, that
I think that, that I think was my concern.
Yeah. Data, it's not, information's not available,
But what we, what we can do is look at
residential places. Yeah.
I just, we, we, we will squeeze in Lamon,
Lydia. Oh, sorry, she's waiting.
That's okay. Thank you.
Uh, very quickly, um, how diverse would your, uh,
community be by way of iwi and other cultures?
Yeah, sure. So, uh, according to the, the last survey
that we did last year, I think it was 15% Pacifica,
11% Maori.
Um, yeah, our boards really quite diverse.
Uh, we do a specific Chinese disability support group, uh,
that uses WeChat, that's got 180 families through it.
So yeah, quite unique in that regard.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
We appreciate your time, uh, Mike today.
Um, wish you,
wish you a really good afternoon, good weekend.
But we're gonna move on the next, uh, next one,
which I think is, uh, Dr.
Steve Glassy from Animal Evac New Zealand.
And it's just coming on. You can, uh, turn on your camera
and unmute and we'll give you, uh, 10 minutes
and I'll let you know when there's a minute or two to go,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
It's all yours,
Koto. Good morning
or good afternoon. Uh, my name is Dr.
Steve Glassy. I'm the patron
of Animal Evac, uh, New Zealand.
Uh, new Zealand's only dedicated animal
disaster management charity.
Uh, we have no staff, we have no buildings, uh,
we have no assets and we've got less than $500 in the bank.
Um, yet we operated in generated, uh, one
of the largest amount
of public submissions in history on civil defense in
our, in our recent history.
Uh, we're here today 'cause we felt
that the emergency management built in its current, uh, form
fails the animals and also the citizens of our country.
And we hope that you can change that as the,
as the former CEO of Wellton, S-P-C-A-I lead the largest,
um, animal disaster rescue operation in New Zealand history,
which was an EDGECOM 2017,
where over a thousand animals were left
behind following the evacuation of the township.
When the stop bank along the Ring Taki River, uh, failed.
Uh, the brave efforts of volunteers from the SPCA
Massey University Fire Service
and Civil Defense Rescue teams rescued these
animals in the following days.
Um, the efforts went largely unrecognized
early on when we asked for more teams to, to be deployed
to help the race against the clock to save these animals.
Our request was declined by the Ministry
for Primary Industries
because they didn't wanna make a fuss.
Countless animals died waiting to be rescued,
and it was that experience, which was the catalyst
for the formation of Animal Evac New Zealand.
Because the system was broken,
we can all remember the impact of Hurricane Katrina
that struck the US Gulf States in 2005,
over 1400 people died,
and what would become one
of the deadliest disasters in US history?
44% of those who chose to stay behind
despite the mandatory evacuation order did so,
at least in part because they could not take their pets.
Just a year later, the PET
and Emergency Transportation Standards Act
or Pets Act was introduced as federal law.
In the landslide vote, the Pets Act mandated plans
provided funding as the federal law
and ensured that animals were rescued, transported,
and housed during disasters.
They did this because saving animals saves human lives.
As the former FEMA administrator said in our 2019 report
launch at Parliament Pets are people.
The emergency management bill takes New Zealand from Cold
War era thinking to just 2006.
It only covers a third of the key aspects
of the 20-year-old US legislation.
Since then, since the US have passed that act,
other countries from Italy to Columbia have passed laws,
not animal welfare laws,
but changes specifically to disaster management law
to ensure that animals are protected.
Columbia has one of the best laws in the world now.
The emergency management bill has not just failed to meet
or even consider international best practice.
It's failed democracy.
When the first emergency management bill was brought
before Select committee in 2023,
animal Evac knew it was gonna be now or never.
We emptied our bank account
and with the support of MediaWorks,
we launched our No Animal Left Behind Campaign.
This included digital advertising digital billboards across
the country, and this led to the highest ever number
of public submissions recorded on civil defense.
An analysis of these submissions
to the emergency management bill number one was published in
the peer reviewed journal MDPI Pets.
It found that over 61% of
over 61% raised the importance
of including animals in new emergency management law.
48% of all public submissions were directly attributed
to our 2023 No Animal Left Behind campaign.
Following the July, 2024 Pets article,
a validation study was undertaken
by the parliamentary library
and concurred with these findings.
Both studies found
by proportion animals were the most significant issue
raised in submissions.
Yet this has not been reflected in policy advice.
The articles give policy advisors an
empirical analysis on a plate.
It highlighted several non-animal issues such
as community resilience, Maori participation,
accountability, transparency, risk reduction recovery,
which would've added further substance
to policy advice if it had been used this year.
Documents supplied by the under the Official Information Act
following complaint upheld by the ombudsman, found
that the National Emergency Management Agency had developed
a project plan for emergency management reform,
including the very bill before you.
It articulated many risks
and specified mitigation such as robust peer review,
ensuring previous feedback was taken on board
and ensuring the project was not distracted
by operational response.
The project plan was never approved
and 75 of the 75% of the risks identified eventuated
tables drafted to inform the, the bill had little to no
scientific evidence to substantiate the recommendations.
In fact, none of the references cited even included the pets
article, the only published peer review study on the
emergency management bill.
It is far from convenient that this research was emitted,
yet replaced with mere opinion something,
something that the likes
of Sir Peter Gluckman has long warned about
officials making up policy advice based on opinion
and agendas not scientific evidence.
As he once quoted, if you don't use the the evidence
properly and policy formation, you are likely to,
you're less likely to make a good choice.
The government of the day has not received evidence-based
policy advice and the depth
and focus on the points raised as not reflect the views
of public submissions.
We believe the members of the select committee have every
right to ask how officials formed their policy advice,
why their own project and risk management process were not
followed, and how we ended up
with the most underwhelming emergency management
reform in modern history.
The government of the day, excuse me,
the current bill does not just fail animals.
It fails to represent the expectations of citizens
and fails to provide impartial objective
and accurate policy advice to the government.
If there is any scientific evidence
that counters the recommendations in our submissions,
we are very interested to see this
more broadly beyond animals.
The Emergency Management Bill lacks thought leadership.
We continue to have an endless series
of disjointed Knee Jack re, uh, reviews and inquiries.
We have not learned from previous disasters like the states
of Victoria and Queensland who have a Inspector General
for emergency management
that provides consistent independent assurance
of the emergency management system.
NEMA cannot be the regulator operator
and policy maker if we are ever
to see genuine system improvement.
Police and ambulance both have independent bodies,
yet the likes of emergency management
and fire services don't.
Ministers and mps need confidence
that there is a standing independent body
that can review emergency management system failures
and issues of public interest.
Additionally, despite flooding being the number one cause
for emergency declarations in New Zealand,
we still have no flood rescue plan or capability.
The Hut Valley is the most densely populated flood plan in
New Zealand, and when the flood protection fails
and it will one day, we'll have one
Minute to go there.
An event that was the genesis to, um, create better laws
for every day that we, for every day we fail
to reform animal disaster management arrangements,
we will continue to put human lives at risk, risk
as our elected representatives.
We hope that you will listen to the overwhelming call
for animals to be better included. Thank you for your time
And thank you for your time, uh, Dr.
Um, classy. Um, unfortunately we are out of time now,
so we won't have time for questions,
but I think you've been very clear in, in your view.
So, um, well understood.
Um, we are gonna move on to Earth Sciences New Zealand,
and I believe we have maybe Graham, Andrew,
and Alex ready to go.
Um, please feel free to just turn on your cameras
and unmute yourself.
Um, there'll be 10 minutes, uh, to be shared
between you all, and I'll let you know when there's one
or two minutes to go, but hopefully you can
save a little time for questions.
It's, uh, floors, yours.
Uh, I'm not sure if all my video is showing me. Sorry.
Apologies for that. Um,
That's okay. We can hear you.
Okay, Ko thank you very much
for this opportunity to speak with you today.
I'm Dr. Andrew Tate, general Manager for Climate
and Weather Hazards, and I'm joined by Dr. Graham Leonard,
general Manager for Geological Hazards.
And we're here on behalf of Earth Sciences New Zealand,
the New Crown Research Institute formed from the merger
of NIWA and GNS Science
with the Measurement Standards Laboratory and Mid Service.
Joining soon Earth Science's New Zealand provides
New Zealand with world-class scientific expertise across six
missions, including geological hazards and weather
and climate hazards.
We play a vital role in supporting the emergency management
system and responding to geological hazards
and weather events by providing critical data models, tools,
and scientific expertise that inform decision making
before, during, and after emergencies.
We strongly support the bill
and its aim to strengthen New Zealand's
emergency management System.
With increasing climate driven hazards,
we welcome the focus on better coordination, resilience,
and risk reduction,
and the intent to strengthen the role of iwi
and Maori in emergency management.
Our core message today is simple,
effective emergency management depends on access
to high quality scientific data to and expertise.
The bill rightly emphasizes comprehensive
all hazards end-to-end risk management.
However, success depends on ensuring
agencies can access up-to-date consistent
and integrated scientific information about hazards,
probabilities, exposure, and vulnerability.
This bill must ensure that the science system
is enabled and resourced to provide the evidence needed
to make decisions.
We support the Bill's intention
to define essential infrastructure.
However, key scientific infrastructure such
as Geo Net
and the National Weather Radar Network are missing from the
current definition.
These systems are relied upon for real time life safety,
decision making, and emergency response.
During events, earth Sciences New Zealand may also qualify
as an essential service provider,
and we believe the legislation should explicitly consider
whether hazard warnings constitute essential services.
If Earth Sciences New Zealand is designated an essential
service or infrastructure provider, the requirement
to maintain full functionality during and
after emergencies would require significant additional
resourcing, including
to support critical dependencies across the
wider science system.
Over to you Graham,
Your Honor, can you hear me?
Um, so on limitation of liability,
we strongly support the bill's,
improved protections relating to civil liability.
Uh, our staff often make difficult decisions under pressure
with imperfect con information.
Clear protection for good faith actions,
especially decisions about when
to issue warnings is essential.
We recommend extending this protection to include some forms
of criminal liability, such as under the Health
and Safety at Work Act to ensure experts are not discouraged
from carrying out critical emergency functions.
In terms of ministerial
and director general powers,
the bill grants broad discretionary powers to the Minister
and Director General, and we recommend clearer consultation
and decision-making frameworks
where these powers may impose new obligations
on science organizations.
To reiterate our earlier position,
when science agencies are required to respond,
they must be properly resourced to do so, uh,
on risk tolerance and risk reduction.
The bill references end-to-end risk management,
but does not clearly define risk tolerance
or specify where decisions about risk tolerance should sit.
This creates uncertainty,
particularly when developing standards, uh,
enabling risk reduction or determining acceptable levels
of residual risk.
The bill also intersects
with multiple concurrent reform processes,
including resource management, local government, climate,
climate adaptation, science system reform,
and two ongoing coroners inquiries into Cyclone Gabrielle
and the f eruption Tragedy.
Uh, these processes must be coordinated to avoid creating
conflicting risk frameworks.
Critically, the combined legislative system must explicitly
enable risk reduction as the primary mechanism
for achieving tolerable risk, emergency response,
and warnings can only ever address residual risk
and cannot substitute
for proactive adaptation and mitigation.
Uh, in closing, uh,
earth Sciences New Zealand welcomes this bill
as a significant step towards a more resilient.
We believe the legislation will be strengthened by
recognizing scientific infrastructure
and services as essential,
ensuring resourcing matches new duties,
clarifying liability protections, defining risk tolerance,
and align aligning with wider legislative reforms.
We're committed to working with government agencies, iwi
and Maori partners and the emergency management sector
to build a system that is scientifically robust,
equitable, and future focused.
Thank you for your time and consideration
and we welcome questions.
Thank you. We'll start with Andy Foster.
Now look, thanks very much and thank you, um, both
for the work that you do.
Um, two quick questions.
First one of is in terms of the sort of essential, um,
essential services, most of this seems
to be focused on essential services during, uh,
and in the aftermath of a, uh,
of a disaster event rather than essential services
and the pre-planning to try and mitigate
or avoid, uh, the extent of a, a disaster.
Am am I being accurate with that?
And I, I understand exactly what you're saying in terms
of the, the essential, um, importance of having good, um,
information at the front end.
But isn't that what, isn't the bill talking about the
essential services being, um, more about, uh, the response
when an, when an event has occurred?
Shall I take that? Um, yes, no, you, you,
you've got a good point and I, and I believe you're correct.
Uh, the, the science, uh, advice
and input, uh, in terms of forecasting
and warnings support that we provide is in
that area you are speaking about.
And it, it's a transitional area.
So, uh, when an event has occurred
or is about to occur in the case of, uh, perhaps
an imminent ex tropical cyclone
or a volcano that's about to erupt or it has just erupted
or we've just had an earthquake, uh, that critical science,
uh, data, uh, intelligence
and science advice is the service
and probably the infrastructure for the data
behind it may well be critical as well.
So there, there is that intersection point
of the immediate forecasting
and the immediate response where
that is available and potentially needed.
Yeah, that makes sense. And look,
the other area I just wanted to ask you about is, um,
I've heard some discussion about, uh, doing sort
of national flood and hazard mapping, um,
but having seen quite a lot of the work
that's been done mostly by regional councils and um, and TA
and TAs as well, there's a lot of mapping
that's already been done and I hate, hate to think
that we would duplicate something that's been done already.
Can you just shed any light on that please?
Yeah, sure. I can, uh, cover that one. Thank you.
Um, so you are right in terms of the current level
of understanding very much is based on work that's been done
by councils and, um, and agency supporting councils.
Uh, the, the direction from the ministry for the environment
and at the moment is to consolidate all of that information
and bring it together in a way that can be accessible
for any part of New Zealand.
So very much the concept
of the national flood map being proposed, um, by Ministry
of the environment is to bring together all of that
regional information, but we feel that there is a missing,
uh, step here and
that is having a nationally consistent flood, um, model
that, um, is based on the same set of parameters,
this at the same resolution
and can be utilized from national scale assessment.
And we've been working on that as our science as New Zealand
and we hope that that will be part of the package
of information that con constitutes
what a national flood map is.
Look, thanks. And can I just ask one more question,
which is just in terms of, we've had quite a lot of, uh,
discussion and you've mentioned it as well,
other legislation which is going on at the moment,
particularly thinking around the planning legislation, um,
and how the, the, the interface between emergency management
planning, the front end, the, the avoidance of risk,
the mitigation of risk, um, and how we do our planning.
So we, we try and, you know, we try
and avoid, uh, both people in property getting, getting in
as much difficulty as they sometimes do at the moment.
There's a significant role for you in that planning as well.
And if so, how would that play out in terms of, you know,
when councils are doing planning, et cetera,
what's the role we'd expect
to see Earth Sciences play in terms of saying,
well go there, design it this way, don't do it that way?
Yeah, we bring significant expertise
and we are already involved in a lot of
that planning exercise in terms of understanding your
resilience to hazards based on historic events
and and modeling.
So that is critical to what we do.
We feel like that that is in fact the most important part
of risk management is to understand your, um, exposure
to hazards and act in a way to, um,
avoid hazards or, uh, mitigate hazards before they happen.
The response to events is really response
to the residual risk that, um, you're exposed to
after you've, um, done everything you can
to mitigate that risk in the first place.
Yeah, but we're, um, completely across all of that
and working with councils and government agencies.
And is the, does the bill recognize that properly?
I, I might just comment
that I think there's an opportunity Yeah, really quickly
Then we'll be out of time.
So there's an opportunity for this bill in coordination
with this resource management and local government reforms
and science system reforms to be a very effective,
cohesive system, but it would need
to be coordinated across all of those.
Thank you. Very good.
Thank you, um, for your time
and thanks for joining us today
to the whole team from sciences.
Um, appreciate you guys
and we are now going to move up to the bay of Plenty.
I think we have, um, umm, feline nui joining us.
I can see who there. You can turn
your camera on if you like.
We're gonna give, um, there's 10 minutes for you guys.
I'll let you know when there's one or two to go,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
Oh, you've just muted now, so if you can unmute
and turn on your camera, that would be fantastic.
There we are.
Ura all yours.
Thank you. Thank you sincerely for this opportunity
to speak briefly to our submission.
I'm failing Twi, the blessed servant mayor of Kdo District,
and I appear on behalf of the Bay
of Plenty Emergency Management Group
as chair of the joint committee.
It is a sincere privilege to be able to share our thoughts
and views and one we do not take lightly.
Thank you. Can I also please briefly take a moment
to acknowledge, uh, those communities in our beautiful ana,
uh, bay, plenty area who have been impacted recently,
specifically, or port together Western Bay?
Plenty. And of course Ana, I will take our submission
as read, but would like to emphasize please three areas
of concern or perhaps opportunity
and the current bill review the role of iwi
as treaty partners in emergency management.
The last two severe weather events, tropical low zero five F
and the Valentine's Day weather event have further
highlighted the opportunity, willingness
and preparedness of our many Bay I
to be front and center to response and recovery.
However, the current operating structures under Sims offers
no guidance or direction on how and who to engage with.
It is clear and appropriately so
that Iwi Maori have a much more significant role
to play in emergency management going forward.
However, there is some confusion over the role
of Council Iwi liaison offices
and mandated iwi representatives up and down the system
and also at what level iwi should be represented.
We submit that certainly at governance level on the new
emergency management committees as well as appointment
to emergency management coordinating executive groups.
And we welcome any guidance given the one Iwi representative
signaled in the current bill review.
Given our vast majority of Iwi Maori
and our bay of what we witnessed
during these last two events,
in particular is an expectation
that Iwi will also be involved in operational decision
making at coordination
and operation centers outside
of the current iwi liaison roles which exist.
This is a significant shift
and brings risk as well as opportunity for the sector
and the communities we collectively serve.
Therefore, I take this opportunity
to emphasize our recommendations on page three
of our submission that the minister
and director general provide much greater clarity
to guide us to emergency management groups
and our EB partners on their role throughout the emergency
management system.
This can be achieved either by amending the current bill
or providing director general guidance
and supported by work streams in the emergency management
system improvement program of work commenced by nema.
Our second area, the role of local authorities and councils.
We strongly support the intent of the bill to clarify roles
and responsibilities across the emergency management system
as this is much needed.
We're particularly pleased with the direction of travel
that acknowledges the huge role
that councils play in serving their communities during times
of stress and danger, fear
and vulnerability in emergencies
however they arise, councils know their communities best,
are well connected, have strong networks
that possess local knowledge that regional
and centrally located practitioners may never gain.
These are the attributes
that can significantly enhance service delivery into
communities in their time of need.
However, we are aware
that some councils do not see emergency
management as core business.
This mindset being the barrier to appropriate service
and support to communities
or delivery of service too late when damage has been done.
This was a core finding of a number of recent reviews.
So we warmly welcome this shift, which encourages
and strengthens councils
and new chief executives to view emergency management
as council business while balancing the need
to deliver core council services in a time
of local government sector reform.
Our submission to you goes further
by respectfully suggesting a simple way
of baking the shift in a requirement for local authorities
to clearly stipulate in their long term plan
and associated annual plans
how they will deliver emergency management
services to their communities.
Consult on those plans
with those communities will provide accountability
to our communities as well as complete the whole
of society approach
that the ministers review alluded to last year.
Within currently signaled ing limitations,
where does the cost fall?
One question we do have of the committee
and of the ministers, how the shift will be funded.
Talk of rate, caps, cost of living crises,
local government reform and the like.
Pose a burden to councils who have limited levers
to pull when seeking extra funding for both the initiatives
or the shifts proposed earlier.
The bill proposes substantial news responsibilities
for emergency management committees, local authority members
and critical infrastructure entities,
yet introduces no new funding powers, no assurance
of central government contribution
and limited mechanisms for sustainable capability
or capacity development.
The group highlights the risk of unfunded mandates,
regional inequity and the inability of some councils,
particularly the smaller TAs to meet these obligations under
existing rating
and resourcing constraints
for our beautiful Towana Bay here offshore islands.
And who is responsible,
what is currently proposed in the bill is similar
to the arrangement which historically existed in the Bay
plenty with a co-management approach framed by an MOU.
This is proved as noted in various discussion
and review documents to be not fit for purpose.
The MOU that historically existed was rescinded in 2021
due in part in large part to the confusion it created
and the finger pointing.
The very unhelpful finger pointing
that resulted our rationale
and experience in emergency management is
that despite the best efforts in co-management approaches
in times of crisis, co-management can result in no
management and post-event recriminations about
roles and responsibilities.
We note too that many of the submissions on the recent
substantive consultation document have focused on the ever
increasing need for clearer lines of accountability
and delineation, clearer articulation of roles
and responsibilities of our partner agencies.
Our experience stated again is that a co-management approach
to the offshore islands would not deliver
this intended outcome.
We reiterate our written submission
of now transferring responsibility
for emergency management services on the offshore islands
to one entity only,
and that is regional council administering body.
These then are the key matters in our submission
that we wish to highlight on behalf of the members
that make up the bay plenty Emergency Management Group.
Thank you again for this opportunity, RA
Ra and thank you and really interesting hearing about the,
um, the islands as well.
Um, I'm just looking around the room
to see if there were any other questions though We are right
on time, so it looks like we're okay.
Um, appreciate your time. Thank you for joining us.
Thank and, uh, wish you all the best up there.
Um, we're gonna move on to our next submission now.
Um, now I understand Awa might be having a little bit
of trouble getting in so I can see Justin, I think
and just feel free to turn on your camera.
Keto. Justin, is it, is it just you we're expecting
or is it, uh, Maura as well?
Oh, here she is. Kira.
Um, we've got 10 minutes
to hear from Roco, a charitable trust.
I, I'll give the time over to you now,
but I'll let you know when there's a minute or two to go
and you might like to leave time for questions
A Kira committee members.
Um, and first of all, apologies
that my cameras are working in the wrong direction,
so I'll try and turn to the side.
Um, I know that you've asked that we don't repeat
what was said, um, in the written submission,
so I'm assuming that that has been available to you also,
I just really want to summarize a couple of
of key points very briefly.
Um, I think the first key thing is
to emphasize the vital role of primary care, um,
and also mechanisms for sustaining access
to general practice and pharmacy,
particularly in any emergency situation.
And so we'd recommend
that it's added into the legislation at Schedule three,
alongside services like Transport.
Um, we would also advise strengthening planning provisions
so that regional local emergency management plans are
co-developed with primary health organizations,
which are in every community
and can reflect the real time primary care capacity
and workforce available to support a response.
Primary care also needs to be at the table
with the regional committees
and local planning instead of relying
as we do at the moment on an ad hoc
and voluntary participation when an emergency happens
in any community.
Um, Justin can certainly talk about some
of the recent examples, um, cyclone Gabriel,
even though the recent Western May
of plenty, um, experiences.
So, mm. Justin you might wanna talk about how things are
and then we can return to any questions about
how we think they might be better.
Thank you. Apologies.
I did have a, a few little headphone issues.
I'm assuming people can hear me now. Alright, wonderful.
Uh, so look, kra, I'm the CEO
of Pinnacle Midland South Network at PHO across Tewa.
Uh, I just wanted to to share a little bit
of an experience from from Cyclone Gabrielle.
Um, so obviously there was plenty of warning
that Cyclone Gabrielle was going to hit predominantly in,
uh, areas like the Cora Mandel.
And so there, while not mandated,
there was a significant preparation event where, uh,
patients were identified with primary care, uh,
medications put into the area, resilience for communication,
which meant that when the area was hit, um,
the area was able to respond quite quickly in
an integrated fashion.
Now, admittedly, uh, at that time wasn't expected to be hit
as hard, but the preparation hadn't been done in that area.
And so for a provider like ourselves, we went
for four days without any direct
communication with our team.
Instead relying on about third or fourth hand information.
Um, medications weren't there.
Practitioners were caught out of space
and unable to get to sites.
And the really thing that was missing in
that space was the ability to organize several
of the practices,
because in many of these areas, it's not one GP practice,
it's multiple practices to organize them where staff can go
to other sites where impacts have been and facilities, um,
and really just allow that integration across
multiple independent businesses to get the best outcome
for the society that we're serving.
Because it's important to remember
that while hospitals are often a key focus in these things,
95% of all interactions
with the health system occur in primary care.
Most of these events have not seen significant events
or numbers of patients requiring hospitalization,
but the downstream impact,
which is felt in those communities for weeks and months
after, has felt strongly in primary care.
So really just want to emphasize the fact
that primary care needs to be at the table early,
particularly in the planning phases
to ensure we get the best outcomes for our communities.
We're happy to take questions
and I just want to, um, uh, advise people that the role
of the primary health organization in this could
be a significant one.
And because the P hos coordinate their network
of general practice and,
and cover all general practice in New Zealand.
Um, so there is that ability for a core function
that's already, um, structured
and organized working in partnership with Health New Zealand
and those communities, um, so
that a coordinated response is entirely possible within
the existing relationships.
Thank you. That, that's a good point to raise
and I'll, uh, give the first question to Andy Foster.
Thank you. Um, and,
and like many others, thank you for the work that you do.
Um, just the issue I'm interested in is how onerous the,
the engagement process is gonna be with, um,
the primary care sector, uh,
and how that will practically work its way out.
I mean, I can imagine that for, um, individual, uh,
medical practices, particularly with the smaller ones, um,
engaging in depth
and frequently, um, with emergency management, um,
other emergency management parties is gonna be very
challenging in advance of an event.
Um, how do you see it practically working out
for both smaller and larger, um, uh, primary,
primary care entities?
I think Justin can probably give the,
the real life experience again on that.
'cause it already does happen.
It's just that we have an opportunity
to make it more structured, um,
because PH os have that relationship already with, um,
practices, um, at scale across the community
and then coordinate together regionally
and nationally as well.
Um, but Justin, you might wanna describe, um, exactly
what the opportunity is there.
Yeah, so I I, you know,
there's 1100 general practices across the country,
and I think it's fair to say that, you know,
the smallest is about two
or 300 patients in the largest is is,
you know, tens of thousands.
Um, but there's about 30 ps across the country that act as
that miso level organization that have strong relationships
with those practices, um,
and can coordinate that on behalf of the system.
They also have, uh, the strong relationships
with the individual practitioners, which allow them
to engage out of hours, uh, evenings, weekends, things like
that, that will allow for that preparation to be done so
that individual practices don't have
to necessarily engage all the time that,
but someone dedicated can engage on their behalf.
Okay. And so you would like to see those Ps um, working
with, uh, the, the other emergency management, um,
organizations as a, a partner at the table both
before events, so you are all ready to go,
but also when, during and after an event?
Absolutely. Yeah. Cool. No, thank you.
Thank you. And thank you very much, um,
for your time today.
I really appreciate you and, and the,
and the very thorough written submission
and obviously thanks for, for what you
and all the GPS you represent do in the community.
It's, um, much appreciated.
Uh, with that we are gonna move, uh, to the deep south now,
and I think we have John Cruin online,
so we'll just give him a minute, uh, to come up.
There we are. Um, welcome John.
You're welcome to turn on your camera and unmute.
Um, uh,
and we are gonna hand over the time to you.
I'll let you know, uh, when there's a minute or so to run.
Uh, but you might like to leave, uh, one
or two of you five minutes for some questions.
Otherwise it's all yours. You're just muted at the moment.
You'll just need to unmute John. You can.
There we go. Sorry about that. Gotcha. Now.
Yeah. Okay. Well thanks very much
for the chance to speak to you today.
Uh, so yes, I live in the Tyre ra
and my name is John Cruden.
Um, the bill, the bill is presented
as a legislative response to the report
of the government inquiry in response
to the North island severe weather events, uh, chaired
by sub, uh, sir Jerry matter.
Prior, my, my submission focuses on civil question,
how closely does the bill deliver what the metrie, um,
inquiry actually recommended.
The inquiry was quite clear about the
scale of change required.
I found it found that our emergency management system was
not fit for purpose for a climate change world.
And we are seeing that, that reality now,
not just in Tide Aite or Hawke's Bay, but or Mount Mongo,
but right there in Wellington.
And we are seeing that that reality, um, we're seeing
that the rough weather systems have pushed further south
than recent weeks and are all part of the same pattern,
more intense, more frequent, and less predictable events.
Most climates and meteorologists agree
that climate change is the primary driver
of the increasing severity of these storms,
rainfall extremes and coastal hazards.
The inquiry reflected
that consensus and the bill should too.
The inquiry highlighted four big things
that climate change is now a structural
driver of our emergencies.
That inec inequity is inequity,
I should say shape was most affected
and was who was most affected and who recovered slowest.
That partnership with Iwi and Harper was inconsistent
and under resourced, and that community led response
and resilience were essential but undervalued.
I want to briefly compare those four findings
with what's in the bill.
First of all, climate driven risk.
The inquiry treated the climate change is
essential to emergency risk.
The bill doesn't, climate change is mentioned,
but not named as the primary driver
of the events we're now facing.
And that matters because what is not named is easier
to under resource if the inquiry said the climate change is
reshaping our landscape risk.
I think legislation act cleanly too, plainly too equity.
The inquiry was explicit that low income household, renters,
disabled people, rural committees
and Maori, were disproportionately affected.
Um, you call for a system
that reduces rather than reinforces vulnerability.
The bill acknowledges these issues,
but does not create the clear
e equity obligations in planning response or recovery.
And without obligation, inequity becomes an afterthought.
Rather, equity rather becomes an afterthought rather than
the design principle.
Thirdly, partnership with Iwi
and Harper, the inquiry emphasized the need
for genuine partnership and proper resourcing.
The bill still leans towards consultation rather than shared
decision making, but it does not clearly, um,
it does not create clear equity obligations in planning
and response or recovery without obligations.
Um, the treaty, there's no treaty consistent approach
to the inquiry from the inquiry,
nor does it ensure Maori organizations have the resources
to participate on an equal funding.
Fourthly, community led resilience.
The inquiry recognized
that communities marai volunteers were often,
often the first responders in a practice.
The bill risks over centralization acknowledges community
roles, but doesn't provide mechanisms
or support to strengthen them.
The inquiry asks for a system that empowers communities.
The bill still treats them as supplementary, taken together.
The bill moves in the right direction,
but it doesn't yet deliver the scale of change.
That inquiry is recommended.
I want to offer two constructive improvements.
One that there's an explicit reference to climate change
as the core driver of emergencies.
This aligns the bill with the inquiry
and with the scientific consensus,
and it ensures long-term accountability.
Secondly, that treaty
consistent partnership requirements
and embed equity obligations into planning
and recovery strengthened those things.
They, they, these were central findings of inquiry
and it should be central in the legislation.
I wanna close by bringing it back to the people.
The community's most affected by the Auckland Floods
and Cyclone Garyville.
Were not surprised by the inquiries findings.
They lived them. And
as the Mount slipped disaster in January plus the
Wellington, the Wild Wellington weather later,
earlier this month, these events are no longer
distant or exceptional.
They're the new normal, no matter inquiry call for a system
that matches the reality.
We now live in climate driven, unequal, and deeply local.
This builds a step forward,
but it doesn't yet just meet the scale
of change the inquiry asked for.
And that's it for me. Thank you
for the opportunity to speak today.
I'm sorry I'm not hearing anybody.
What have I done wrong now?
Sorry, Tim, you're on mute. Sorry.
Yeah, my apologies everybody.
No, I thought, um, thank you John and I apologize.
Um, we appreciate your time.
We've actually, uh, gone a little bit over time,
but we appreciate you sticking with us.
Um, but thanks for your submission today.
We are gonna move on to our next submission now, which is,
uh, from Roko Charitable Trust.
And I think we've got Ashanti with us.
Um, if you're able to turn on your camera
and unmute, um, Ashanti, we would love
to hear from you, Kura.
Um, we've got 10 minutes for you.
I'll let you know when there's a minute or two to go.
Um, but you might like to leave some time for questions.
And we've got your written submission here.
You can take that as read. Fantastic. It's yours,
Kilda. Thank you so much.
And I'm having my own sort
of emergency this afternoon.
So like to thank the committee, uh, for being patient.
Awesome. Uh, while I, um, sorted out some IT issues.
So I do hope that I am on screen
'cause I actually can't see myself.
Um, but, um, uh, Koto everybody.
I'm speaking on behalf of the KOA Settlement Trust, um,
where the post settlement governance entity are for koa.
We represent the 17 marae across alwa, uh,
which spreads across the central north island,
including roa, Tito Mata, Cambridge KA,
through to ATU spans significant river systems,
forestry lands, and rural communities
that are regularly exposed to weather events.
And, um, they are becoming increasingly severe.
And we, uh, experienced that recently with a state
of emergency that was declared in Ur Hanga.
Um, we also act as a hub
for our communities in fan Nona in coastal areas when events
displace or impact them.
Uh, RO Kawa supports the overall intent of this bill,
particularly strengthening national consistency,
clarifying governance and operational roles,
and improving coordination across readiness, response
and recovery, uh, in the face of increasing climate events.
Uh, however, um, as noted, uh, the submission will be taken
as read, um, but in light of the recent state of emergency,
um, that was declared in Ur Hanga, um, we believe
that the five areas that our submission focuses
on can really, um, strengthened the bill to ensure
that it does truly work at place.
And it has been really refreshing to hear a number
of submitters today, uh, speak
to the importance of that localism.
So if I to touch on the first point, um,
and my goodness, I did forget to push start on my stopwatch,
uh, but I'll start on the Iwi participation
and emergency management Committee governance just really
would like to highlight the importance
and acknowledge that the build is, um, providing pathways,
uh, for iwi participation, um, uh,
in emergency management, um, operations.
However, and as many submitters have already noted today,
um, iwi participation at the regional governance
level is critical.
Uh, it should not be, um, discretionary,
but rather structurally enabled.
Uh, if iwi are
and marai are relied upon operationally,
governance settings should reflect that reality.
Uh, embedding iwi participation at the governance level
strengthens preparedness clarity and accountability
before emergencies occur.
It ensures decisions about planning capability
and investment are informed by those
who carry enduring responsibility to, to their communities
and to their fwa.
Um, again, it's not about adding complexity,
but ensuring that there's alignment, uh,
across our communities.
The second point is around Maori perspectives
and participation with operational coordination.
Uh, we acknowledge that the bill does recognize Maori
perspectives within the regional operational coordination.
Uh, however, um, iwi
and marae have demonstrated time again, uh, that our, uh,
our participation is not offering perspectives
that when these events do occur, we are mobilized.
Uh, we are mobilizing facilities, volunteers, logistics,
communications and welfare support.
Uh, that support is voluntary.
It's not part of our everyday, uh, operational structure
compared to see them in other regional coordination groups.
Um, therefore it's important that, uh,
the legislation provides, uh, clarity
around clear role definition before these emergencies occur.
Uh, that, uh, uh, provides pathways for proactive training
and preparedness for Mara and Iwi,
and that explicit understandings
of responsibilities are known, uh, iwi can,
and Mara cannot be expected just to plug the gaps
of the systems without clarity.
Um, operational participation must be sus
supported and structured.
Um, again, just real quickly noting alignment
between governance, operations and planning.
Um, we really saw this in the recent events in ROA
around highlighting the importance of that alignment, uh,
when governance, operational coordination
and planning, uh, aligned responses quite smooth.
However, when it's disjointed, the, uh, communities can feel
that impact immediately.
Uh, and more often than not, it's iwi and marai
and those community groups that are bridging those gaps.
Uh, planning must reflect how those,
how response actually unfolds at place
and engagement with iwi must be meaningful
and continuous so
that regional plans reflect operational reality.
Uh, moving on to resourcing reimbursement
and the role of marae.
Again, whanau and marae are capable, ready,
and willing to step up.
Um, it's just a part of what we do.
It is not acceptable though
for the emergency management system to assume
that Mara will simply absorb the cost of response
because of our goodwill or our mana
or love for our community.
Uh, and Ang
and I'm sure across, uh, the MuTu
where these events have occurred, facilities were open,
food prepared, volunteers, mobilized and resources used.
Those actions carry real financial
and uh, costs to those, uh, to our Mara and our whanau.
If the system relies on Mara as hubs response
and recovery, it must provide clear, durable mechanisms
to recognize and reimburse that contribution,
and we detail that further in our submission.
Um, and finally, emergency recovery.
Uh, climate risk and protection of ua.
Uh, the recovery and increasing interaction
between emergency response
and long-term land use decisions is important.
KOA recognizes the recovery settings operate alongside other
legislative frameworks and infrastructure powers.
And again, it's been refreshing
to hear a numbers submitted talk about the importance
of alignment of the across the holistic legislative
reform that's underway.
However, the context in which these powers will
operate is changing rapidly.
The increasing frequency intensity
and, um, geographic spread of climate related events, uh,
means that emergency and recovery processes will be relied
upon more often and across wider areas.
Um, it is how emergency response settings, recovery,
decision making, and infrastructure alignment,
manage retreat, and long-term land use planning interact
as a connected system.
Um, there is a real risk,
however, that land which cannot be acquired
during the immediate FA emergency phase,
may later come under pressure
through follow one recovery route works infrastructure,
relocation, or permanent public works once
the crisis has passed.
This risk is highlighted in areas such as river margins
and floodplains locations where Maori land
and treaty settlement regs land are often situated.
In those context, temporary emergency responses can harden
into permanent outcomes with significant implications
for hanau, um, mahi tapu
and the exercise of man Oranga also demonstrated
that severe weather impacts more than infrastructure
were also affected.
This, uh, the distress.
This cause for whanau cannot be overestimated,
overstated, apologies.
It is culturally unacceptable to leave damaged
or unsupported.
Um, uh,
and as climate related events increase recovery
planning must explicitly recognize the protection
of those tga.
Um, I'm, I am mindful of time,
so I'm just gonna quickly move on
and just note in closing again, that we loco are,
are supportive of the intent of the bill,
and I'm sure you can agree with that.
The severe weather events over the past few years have
demonstrated how capable and willing iwi, hapu,
and marae are to respond to such events.
But capability and goodwill are not a substitute
for structural recognition, clarity, and support.
Uh, the question is whether this legislation fully reflects
the operational reality on the ground in a way
that is sustainable in fear
with targeted refinements across government,
governance participation, operational clarity,
system alignment, resourcing
and protection of ua,
this bill can generally strengthen emergency
management at pace.
Um, so a I rushed through that.
I'm happy to take any questions if I do have time.
No, you've, you've,
you've nailed it with a minute to spare.
Um, and, and can I, can I just ask and, and,
and look, I agree with
what you said about the amazing work we've seen across, uh,
many Hapi rai um, o over recent events.
Um, where do you see the balance, and, and I, I'll try
and explain it, but when you see the balance between, uh,
iwi involvement, uh, versus, you know,
do you wanna be involved and,
and have that, um, that that sort
of leadership role in the community at all cost,
or if there was someone else that was gonna,
like there was a local school that
by chance also had a really good industrial sort of kitchen.
I, I don't know, there's a, maybe a church down the road
that could provide that, um, but
therefore it wouldn't impose the financial imposition,
which you sort of articulated.
And I think the, the third point in your one was
what paragraph eight in your, in your written submission
where it talked about sort of reimbursement and things.
W would you rather sort of stay involved?
I mean, I know Iwi will always be involved, so
that's why I say don't take this too literally.
But do you want to stay involved no matter what?
Or is, is there a point at which you go, well,
we'll just do what's financially manageable
and if someone else can do it and they have the means
and the resources, it'll be better for them.
Or h how do you see that?
Does that make sense? Am I making sense?
Yeah, yeah, absolutely. You are ma you are making sense.
And, and I do understand the,
the viewpoint that you are coming from.
Uh, I think the question though is around, uh,
the immediate response to, to those provisions.
As we saw in OT Hanga, a number of our schools, for example,
were impacted, uh, by, by the floods.
And, and, and generally those, um, uh,
those locations that you referenced, um, tend
to be first hit.
Our marai are generally set to cater 400, um,
because, uh, and we, yeah, and we,
and we are well prepared to do that.
Uh, and I think the question is not whether we're prepared
to stay, um, all in, uh, I think there will always be a,
uh, a point where you transition, um,
from response into recovery.
And that decision should be,
those pathways should be set within the legislation
to allow, um, the, um, the segs to, um,
have those conversations
and have those communities, um, being able to determine when
that pathway, when, when that transition happens.
Uh, it there in regards to funding,
however, it's just ensuring
that when those responses do happen, that iwi
and Marai are not absorbing immediately those costs, um,
long term without the immediate need for reimbursement.
That makes sense. Thank you. If that makes sense.
You and yeah.
No, Kira, I appreciate your time
and thanks for just helping me tease out those issues.
It's helpful to see them from lots of different sides.
So, hey, we appreciate your time today.
I think we're gonna move on to our next Thank you.
Um, sub miss out, but yeah, wish all the best.
Um, uh, right.
We are heading to a,
I I apologize if I have not pronounced that correctly.
Um, they are joining us now that I can see them now.
So, um, we've got five minutes set aside for you
and, um, I'll let you know when there is a minute
or two ago, but you may like
to leave time for questions there.
It's all over to you.
Coso, can you hear me? Yes.
Oh, uh, my name is Anya.
Um, I am a PAA disabled person
and I have contributed to the work at the nexus
of disability and climate change for some time.
So I see this bill as a big improvement, obviously,
on the existing, um,
legislative emergency management framework,
but also see it falling short in crucial respects, um,
like leaving some of TUI based, um, shared decision making
and the scope of disproportionately affected communities,
essentially to chance when they could,
and in my view, must be specified to take advantage of this,
um, significant, um, opportunity
to really improve on a emergency management
system for the long term.
So to put a bit of context, um,
disabled people have long shown leadership, um, in general.
And so that's before, during, and
after emergencies also, um, even when most
of us live in precarious positions ourselves.
Um, so it's usually quite a big job
to set up our living situations, schedules, budgets, ways
of communicating means of transport,
healthcare arrangements and so on.
Just so, um,
and, uh, you know, the unintentional,
however, unintentional the consequences,
it should not fall on those most impacted to bear the brunt
of the significant disruption
of these carefully stitched together arrangements, um,
in emergencies while also trying to fill the gaps, um,
for our community
and emergency response that isn't necessarily, uh, doing
so in a systematic manner.
Um, our rights in emergency situations
as disabled people are protected in international law
that New Zealand has ratified, um, such
as in the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities in Article 11.
Um, so, uh, it's really important that,
um, our access to essentials like emergency communications,
life sustaining infrastructure,
workable evacuation planning,
accessible temporary accommodation
and disability aware mental health supports, um,
are not left to chance.
Um, so I just wanna emphasize that in this bell,
anything less than embedding t obligations,
upholding human rights
and non exhaustively naming disproportionately affected
communities, including naming disabled people within that
amounts, essentially to taking advantage
of community resilience in the name of, you know,
life imperiling shortcuts and economic efficiency.
So let's take the opportunity to do better.
Um, I imagine you have my written submission there. Yes.
So I won't go through the rest of it.
Um, other than to say, uh,
that there's a really important aspect as well, um,
that the Human Rights Commission of Impact, um, highlighted
to about this is a really good chance
to make sure there can be, uh, regulation so that,
um, active involvement
of disabled community can help set up minimum standards
for the accessibility
of things like emergency communications,
processes and infrastructure.
And that's done systematically at a national level
to take it, the sort of burden of us having to do that again
and again locally as well.
Um, there will be a degree to which
that can be done nationally
and then localized rather than needing
to go from scratch every, in, every city
and, um, you know, town locally.
So yeah. Happy to take any questions.
Thank you very much.
Um, we are almost on time,
but I'll just check if there are any
other questions before we go.
No, well thank you Anya,
and I'm sorry for pronouncing your name incorrectly,
but we appreciate both your written submission
and taking the time to join us today
and for your, um, work
as you outlined to us earlier as well.
That's really grateful.
So, um, we're going to move on to our next, uh,
submission in just a moment.
Um, and we're just gonna give the,
we'll just take a short tactical pause while we give the
children's commission, um, time to join.
We're expecting her only to turn up at the last minute,
so if members are happy to just, um, pause
and as soon as she's with us, we'll,
um, we'll go live again. Tim,
Can I just ask one question?
Yes. Um, the last,
the last two submissions are the same in terms of the,
what we've got attached to the document.
We don't seem to have the one from t
Uh, so one of them has, um, canceled No, it's the last
Two after that.
Yeah. So one has canceled
and then one more of the ones after that have canceled.
And so we are just, um, waiting to, uh, and,
and that they can't come today.
And I can, I can give you the name of, um, uh,
which one that, that is that, uh,
uh, won't be joining us today.
They're unable to join us. Worries.
So it's just the other one.
That's that's fine because we haven't got their,
um, written submission attached.
Yeah, that's right. So that's sort of all thanks, um,
falling, falling into place.
Um, but the link will get updated
to the Title 2 0 1 is the message from the clerk,
so grateful to their support.
Um, the clerks are doing their best to shuffle
that last one forward if we can,
to come in at four 30 so they can get here.
Right. The children's commissioner is, uh,
just coming online now, so, um,
right, welcome, uh, Dr.
Clear Achmad, the Children's Commissioner.
Um, we've got 10 minutes for your submission.
I'll let you know when there's a minute or two to run.
Um, you can take your written submission as read,
but you might like to leave some time for questions.
It's all yours.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. In greetings to all members
of the committee this afternoon,
I'm, I'm the children's commissioner.
I'm the independent statutory advocate
for all children in New Zealand under the age of 18,
and all children and young people under the age of 25
who have been in or who are in the care and
or custody of the state today.
In light of the fact that we're discussing the emergency
management bill, I want
to acknowledge the devastating impacts
of recent weather events in
so many regions around New Zealand.
I note that so many families
and communities are still recovering from these events,
and that for some this will take many more months,
if not years to fully recover.
I especially express my deepest condolences to the families
who have lost their precious children in the recent extreme
weather events since the start of the year.
And to the children and young people of New Zealand
who have lost much loved family members
or friends in these events, it's crucial that all children
affected by these recent extreme weather events have the
right support around them for as long as they needed.
I also think that the recent weather events spring into an
absolute crystal clear focus, the importance of this bill
and its purpose, and why it is so crucial that prevention
and response efforts
around emergency management must put New Zealand's children
front and center, and must involve children
and young people in those efforts.
I've provided my written submission on this bill,
and I'm speaking to you about it today
because emergencies in New Zealand
have a profound impact on children and their rights,
but this is often overlooked.
So I'm speaking with you in an effort to, uh, appeal to you
to put attention on children
and young people in the context
of this emergency management bill.
The fact is that children are disproportionately impacted
by emergencies.
This is because of their age
and stage of life, meaning
that emergencies present a significant threat
to children's health and development
and wellbeing due to their stage of physical
and emotional development.
Children are most at risk of death, injury, illness,
and experience and mental health difficulties
during emergencies.
And in the aftermath of these,
this includes extreme weather events such
as those over the summer and in the aftermath of them.
For example, some children have experienced increased
anxiety about weather bombs
and extreme rain events following on from their experiences
during Cyclone Gabriel
and the Auckland anniversary weekend floods in 2023.
Children's developmental
and educational progress might also be disrupted
during emergencies.
As we saw during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Children's education can be significantly disrupted during
emergencies impacting on one of their basic rights,
the right to education Cyclone Gabriel
and recent, uh, severe weather events also delayed the start
of the school year in some, uh, affected regions,
particularly those cutoff in remote areas on
Raf the East Coast.
And Northland New Zealand
specific research also bears these things out
that I've been highlighting the impacts of emergencies on,
uh, children in New Zealand,
specifically the Auckland anniversary.
Floods and Cyclone Gabriel
have been highlighted in research undertaken
through the growing up in New Zealand study.
These findings show that extreme weather
or natural disasters are related to
increases in post-traumatic stress symptoms, depression
and anxiety in children and young people, and in parents
and caregivers, some of the key people
around children and young people.
The research also shows that disruption caused
to children's educational experiences due to emergencies,
uh, can have an impact and damage to infrastructure
and housing can impact on children
and family social connectedness and access to health
and social services.
I think it's also important
that I draw your attention in the context of this bill
to the fact that children's, uh,
that emergencies can also disrupt children's care
with potential increased risk of abuse
and neglect, especially if they're displaced
or separated from their caregivers.
And in situations where social services
and supports such as home visiting examples are disrupted
for days on end
or for weeks on end, these disruptions in the context
of emergencies raise risks for children's, uh, wellbeing
and safety, but these things can be prevented.
I also note that children who are experiencing adversity
or disparity are likely to be at greater risk, uh, before
and, uh, sorry, during and after a disaster.
For example, low income households are more likely, uh,
to have less resources to repair or to relocate
after a disaster.
And mo ma are more likely to live in, um, coastal
or have cultural connections to coastal
or other disaster prone areas, heightening the need
for preventative protection, uh, efforts to be taken,
led, and shaped by iwi and invested in by the state.
One of the best things that we can do to center children
and their rights in emergency management is
to involve them in emergency management and planning.
This is consistent with their right under Article 12
of the UN Convention on their Right of Rights
of the Child to participate.
And we must remember that children
and young people have repeatedly said they want
to be involved in emergency management
planning and response.
They regularly express that, uh, they want
to be more involved in having their voices heard.
When we are planning for emergencies in New Zealand,
for example, in the growing up in New Zealand research I
mentioned earlier, children
and young people responded to the question,
what do you think the Prime Minister could
or should do to support young people
who might experience a natural disaster such as flooding,
cyclone, or an earthquake?
One Moana from RO highlighted the importance
of their involvement in planning saying,
and I quote, I feel we should learn about preparing
for emergencies and first aid evacuation plan.
Another young person from South Auckland said,
and I quote, give us younger generation the opportunity
to participate and support those in need.
Find ways that we can, as young people
to help our community, right mindset for us to know what
to do when a disaster happens.
I also note the role that a group of, um, two, two minutes,
children age 10 to 18 called Next Generation Conversation.
And Christchurch have been playing in planning
for planning a climate mitigation work for the region.
And this is a great example
how children have shared their voice and views,
and that is now reflected in climate mitigation
and adaptation plans.
Lastly, I want to emphasize how I think this, uh,
bill must make children visible right now.
They are invisible in the bill.
So I advocate to you that the bill needs
to be amended in three respects, firstly, to state clearly
that children are a population group
that have particular needs, rights,
and interests that must be, uh, prioritized.
Second, to state that children
and their rights, uh,
under the convention must be explicitly included
in the National emergency Management strategy
and regional emergency management plans.
And third, that children must be seen
as key stakeholders in active participants
engaged at all four stages of emergency planning.
The bill needs to be strengthened in this regard,
otherwise it's gonna be a truly missed opportunity
to have resilient national emergency
planning here in New Zealand.
Thank you. Um, now unfortunately we've run out of time,
but, um, that really reflects your written submission
and I think you've been clear about the things you're
advocating for there and gives us some things to,
um, talk about later.
So thank you for joining us today.
We're gonna move on to our next semester, thank you.
Which is re which is Thank you Kura, which is Retail nz
and I believe Carolyn Young is online.
We'll just give her a minute to, um, be brought in.
And if you can hear us, Carolyn,
you'll be given a, oh yeah, here we are.
You can turn on your camera and unmute.
Um, we have got 10 minutes for you.
Both your white top is disappearing into the background.
Um, welcome. 10 minutes for you guys.
I'll let you know when there's one or two minutes to go.
You might like to leave some time
for questions. It's all yours.
Yeah, definitely Kiata, everyone.
My name is Carolyn Young, I'm the Chief Executive
of Retail nz
and I'm with my colleague today, Denise Garland,
who's the head of, um, advocacy with us.
Uh, really, um, short
and concise in terms of
what we wanna say will take our submission is read.
The important thing that we see in terms
of emergency management from a retail perspective
is really understanding that, you know, we are part of the,
um, essential services that are provided in the community.
And when you think about, uh, supermarkets
and fuel providers,
they are providing essential ways in which, um,
communities can, uh, obtain resources, get cash, uh,
be able to have fuel to be able to move from A to B.
It is really essential that they are able to continue to run
as soon as possible post and emergency.
Now, one of the things that's been brought to our attention
by our members is the ability to access roads, um, in order
to get, you know, goods and, and fuel
and goods into those areas of emergency.
So there's two things really in the ask.
One is that, um, there's an enhanced level of communication
between, um, the emergency services that are, are, um,
are running a state of emergency area
with essential service providers.
And secondly, that they can have an enhanced ability
to access roading.
They've got obviously professional drivers
that are driving their vehicles that are bringing fuel
into communities
and food into communities that, that they have the ability
to access the roads prior to general opening
to public transport
because that'll ensure that goods, goods get
through in a really timely manner.
Um, so it's really about, um, collaboration
and communication and early access.
Happy to take questions.
Yeah, fantastic. And I love someone
that can have the extra one actually taken as read
and give us a concise summary.
So thank you. Um, Andy Foster,
Thank you. Um, thanks
very much
and thank you for the you for the,
the essential service that you do provide.
Um, I did wanna ask you about how the
engagement process works for your members.
And I'm, um, the ones that have been particularly, um,
raised have been the likes of supermarkets fuel.
You've, you've mentioned as well, um, the engagement process
as regions plan for the eventuality
that there is an emergency,
and then secondly the engagement process.
Um, once there is an emergency in terms of the response to
that emergency, uh, how, what does that look like and,
and how is it adequate or not adequate?
Yeah, I think it's patchy
and I think, um, proactive engagement would be really good
if we could get some general consensus across the motto in
terms of that and, and really understanding, um,
that especially from a supermarkets per perspective,
they do play a really strong community role, um,
in emergency situations.
Those of you that experienced
and remember Cyclone Gabriel will know
that in many areas across the country, they were taking
and providing cash for consumers to be able
to purchase goods because, um, internet was off,
electricity was off, and yet they were able to still ensure
that families could have food on their tables.
So, um, they are a really strong, um,
anchor in the community.
And so in an emergency situation, what the ask really is, is
that they're included in the communication.
Uh, when you're thinking about, you know, yes,
obviously police, ambulance, fire, um, and,
and other emergency services are top priority.
But then when you're thinking about immediate recovery,
immediate access to, you know,
could be bottled water, for example.
It could be just daily basics, it could be some fresh food
or, or any of those sorts of things.
Supermarkets can run, um, supplies for a number of days,
but they do, you know, it will go
through much quicker than you would anticipate.
So the need to get trucks in is really important
for a community to feel confident
that they're not completely isolated
from the rest of the country.
So that's a, that's an engagement before,
before an event so that everybody knows who everybody is.
Yeah. And understanding the order, I guess,
of when you need to be connected and,
and if you think about, um, you know, NZTA, um,
running the roads, you know, how,
how they might open some roads up for a few trucks to go
through for various important issues.
Um, and then they would know there's no one else on the road
and they wouldn't be worried about, you know,
a random driver coming along at the wrong side of the road.
So I think just really thinking about
what is the strategy in those early hours post an emergency.
And even when, um,
the roading network I think is possibly more assured
after an emergency when it, when preparations are being made
to reopen it to the general public even
so they can also make sure that, um,
that they are at the ready to increase their supply, um, up
to those areas that most need it.
Um, a lot of the times, as Carolyn was mentioning, they are
that community hub
and so a lot of the time those sort of local dairies,
supermarkets, they do even also provide things, um, pro bono
to the communities as well.
Sometimes like lunches for those who are, who are working
as part of the response.
And so as Carolyn mentioned that they can get
through those supplies much more quickly than
initially anticipated.
And just having, having that clarity around
that would be really helpful.
Mm-hmm. In terms of the speed of that supply
Look, if I can ask one other question, it's just the,
the supply lines.
Um, so a lot of
what we do these days is very much just in time, um,
is a bit of a problem when when things
go, um, things go wrong.
Um, but particularly we've got some major distribution
centers in various different parts of the country.
Um, the ability of being able
to get product from those distribution centers, the planning
around that to get things from those distribution centers
down to, um, uh, down to the,
the more local supermarkets, et cetera.
Um, what sort of thinking are you aware of
that's being done in that space?
Uh, to make sure it's, yeah,
Look, from a supermarket perspective, they do have, um,
uh, a really in depth logistic planning around
how to distribute product.
And they know how quickly they can move products
and they can, um, prioritize areas to ensure
that they can get, um, products through to areas
that are in more need than others.
Even thinking, um, you know, um,
we are based in Wellington a couple of weeks ago there was,
um, or 10, two weeks ago, there was a,
a big storm that came through.
We know that one of the fer,
my colleague was on a ferry going down to Pickton,
that ferry was delayed leaving.
Yeah, it was brave, delayed
and leaving so they could get extra freight on at that time.
And so it didn't leave for an extra hour
'cause they knew they needed to get as much freight
as possible because there's likely
to be a delay of a couple of days.
And that, you know, what the, um,
what will happen in logistics if you've got two days
where there's no freight moving, say across the islands
for example, or into an area that can put you back a week
or it can put you back 10 days in terms
of getting back onto regular, regular, um, uh, flow.
So yes, there's some issues
around a little bit just in time,
but a supermarket often has good stock for three
or four days, um, depending on the type of emergency
and the sorts of resources that are needed.
You know, um, when they had a water issue in Christchurch
recently, bottled water went flying off the shelves.
So you know that some stuff comes up,
you always make sure you've got enough supply coming through
and they respond really immediately to that.
So having good access to information as it comes through
so they can respond as quickly as possible.
Thank you. And, and we are out of time there,
but I thought your, your two points really clear,
particularly the one that we've, we've sort
of dug into in depth around the planning
and essential deliveries and that kind of thing,
but also just your point and,
and if, if it isn't written in law, it's a good reminder.
Just that communication, you know, is so critical.
Giving people certainty,
even if it's not the answers they want
after an event, um, really helps to bring order.
So thank you, um, for joining us and it's reassuring
For communities too. So
just the last thing would be reassuring for community
to know that they weren't gonna run out of food.
Yeah, that's really helpful. Thank you.
We are gonna move to our final one
and then members we will move into private
after this submission, uh, just briefly.
Um, but we are gonna move to Raki
and I can see, um, thank you for joining us.
Um, we appreciate you guys.
You've got 10 minutes for this submission.
I'll let you know when there's one or two to go,
but you might like to leave a few minutes for questions.
That's all yours,
Kra. Thank you very much.
Uh, T
Maki is an independent Maori environmental organization
committed to strengthening indigenous governance,
protecting TGA and supporting Wau and hapu
and iwi to exercise.
Kaiga TE is also the home of nu,
the Maori Emergency Management Network.
RO New Zealand's first Maori LED
emergency management network.
We'll take our submission as read
and in brief, uh, we support reform
of RO New Zealand's emergency management system
where it genuinely improves outcomes for communities,
strengthens Maori governance and gives effect to Ang.
The bill responds to significant failures identified
by the government inquiry into the response
to the North island severe weather events as a report led
by, uh, Tara Jerry Mara.
That inquiry highlighted systemic underinvestment in
readiness and equitable impacts on Maori
and other disproportionately affected communities.
And over reliance on local
and community capacity without adequate resourcing,
the inquiry explicitly recommended a shift toward funding
readiness, improving the flow of response
and welfare funding and strengthening Maori
and community capability before emergencies occur.
While the bill introduces improvements in structure,
clarity, and national direction,
it does not sufficiently address the
inquiry's core findings.
It expands duties and expectations for local authorities,
iwi, Maori marai, volunteer responders
and communities without establishing corresponding funding
mechanisms or statutory guarantees of support.
Takaki supports the intent of the reform,
however amendments are required
to ensure the bill strengthens readiness rather
than reactivity embeds.
MANA UA authority protects volunteer responders
and aligns funding with the scale
of climate driven risk facing al.
I'll jump through to our recommendations.
Amend the bill to include statutory funding mechanisms
for readiness and reduction,
including climate driven risk and resilience.
Established legislative enablement
for pre-event activation funding triggered
by credible forecasting thresholds.
Embed NEL authority through clear appointment rights
and governance roles, provide direct funding pathways
and timely reimbursement mechanisms for marae
and Maori response providers.
Strengthen statutory protection
and defined authority for accredited volunteer civil defense
groups, including pre declaration situations,
enable flexibility
and controller appointments
to improve operational responsiveness,
provide dedicated support
and capacity investment
for regional emergency plan development.
I have two colleagues who have direct experience of working
with Maori communities in the ma uh, emergencies
that we have experienced.
Anymo cartoony here and wan
or, uh, who's joining online as well.
I'll pass it over to Tash first and,
and maybe she can have a, she can answer any questions
as well and anymore could as well.
I am the local civil defense coordinator, um,
recently led the response
with the East Cape weather event on January 21st, 22nd.
Uh, we'd just like to reiterate points made
by Rita New Zealand about logistics when it comes to
creating that real community resilience.
Uh, when it comes to access to supplies.
Our rural stores in isolated areas like the East Coast,
Hawkes Bay and other areas around the country really rely on
that supply coming in
that's been made difficult throughout multiple
responses with Cyclone Gabriel.
And even the most recent response, we acknowledge it,
the challenges with State Highway two and that road closure.
Uh, but we really require support in removing some
of the boundaries to enable resupply
to smaller communities for resilience.
I think, I think for me, uh,
my focus here in Wellington is regarding the siloing
of crown agencies.
So in the response like the recent one
and Cyclone Gabriel, you have several crown agencies
approaching the people who are trying to just
enact their resilience on the ground.
And then they've got different agencies approaching them
about how they can help.
And this is creates a bottleneck
and a problem for them logistically when they're trying
to just rescue people from houses, clear roads and clear mud
or, you know, survive the storm.
So I'd like to see, um, where
there's something in place that provides a mechanism for all
emergency leads from all agencies
amalgamate themselves first during a response so
that the people at place aren't being inundated
with all the logistics internally
and the ones coming from externally.
That's a big problem and we seem to be having a problem
with constant hui.
No, Dewey. So the action time is now.
We have a lot of panels.
I've been in this space for a few years, a lot of panels,
a lot of conferences, but it doesn't lead to action.
So I'm wondering who's funding these conferences
to reiterate the same thing
that researchers already, um, shown us.
And so that's, those are my comments for today. Thank you.
Well, Koto, thank you.
Um, I'll just look around the room to see if there are any
specific follow on questions from any members.
It looks like Andy Foster has one.
Thank you. Um, I've got a couple there
and I'm sure Nicola Willis would love to hear that,
that last point about, um, all the hooey, um,
going on without the Dewey.
Um, the question I've got for you though is, um, just in,
just in terms of the, um, the speed
of um, response that you're talking about.
There's one thing that you had in your seven
recommendations, um,
and it was around, sorry, it was around, um,
you said recommendation six, enhance enable flexibility
and controller appointments
to improve operational responsiveness.
We had a couple of, um,
very good submissions earlier in the day, uh,
where the issue of training for controllers was raised and,
and they said, well, essentially we don't have, uh, we used
to have a training regime, we don't anymore.
Uh, and that we should have one
because there's a lot of judgment decisions
that controllers, uh, need to make.
And it's not something you want people, um, getting wrong.
Ideally, I just wonder what is it you are actually looking
for in that flexibility?
And also then if the, if you go down that track, what level
of training and support is there to make sure that
controllers are able to do their jobs really well?
'cause the point's been made that,
and I'm well aware of it, the most controllers, it's uh,
very much a part-time, uh, thing that they do on top
of being a, you know, tier two, tier three,
tier four manager in a, in a council.
Okay. Um, just to, um, introduce
what we've already been doing, we've already been,
we've already provided a community sims training
that helped people who are at place in communities
to understand the SIM structure,
the coordinated incident management structure.
And it's our goal that our Maori leaders who are fit
for purpose can do some shadow control training so that
whenever there's a response,
iwi leaders have that opportunity.
And what we found during our trainings is
that we did it in a space that was ours.
We didn't do it in a CM group space,
we did it in our own spaces at marai.
We did it for the Pacifica community
and it was really successful.
Um, we've been piloting it over the last six
to eight months, actually since December
or November last year.
And we feel the same about controller training.
There should be some ability for Pacifica leaders
and Maori leaders or community leaders that can come in
and do some shadow controlling with controllers
and that it be designed with their cultural aspects in mind.
And uh, we found good success with it
and we think it should reach up to that
where everybody works together the skills
and the knowledge of the CDM groups plus the local leaders,
but it has to be carefully designed.
That's our thoughts.
Thank you. Uh, sorry, just to add to that as well.
From a rural perspective,
if we are looking at improving community
and rural resilience, uh, we need to look at options
for local enhancement of current civil defense teams.
Uh, so speaking to experience in
when we are cut off into different islands,
like in Cyclone Gabriel, in this recent weather event,
we are expected to coordinate through one area.
Um, when it comes to quickness of response,
if you are looking at a lack of communications, a lack
of ability to reach into the national
or the emergency coordination center,
what happens is we are experiencing bottlenecks
for decision making, which are quite crucial,
especially in a response with that pre-event
and to the 48 hour mark.
Mm-hmm. No, thank you. Thank you.
We are just on time there.
But, um, appreciate you guys joining us.
That has been a really articulate, um, submission,
really clear, um, task, some really good specific examples
that help us to understand some of those issues.
So I appreciate you all joining us today.
Um, we are going
to move from this zoom into the private zoom
with advisors now for members
and we'll wrap up the day there.
Thanks everybody.